---
contributors: zntfdr
---

## Principles of Data Flow

- Every time we read a piece of data in our view, we're creating a dependency for that view.
- Every time the data changes, the view has to change (read: re-render) to reflect the new value.
- Every piece of data that we're reading in the view hierarchy has a source of truth.
- The source of truth can live in the view hierarchy (if view-related, like a `collapsed` status), or externally (our models).
- We should always have a single source of truth (no duplicate values).

## [`@State`][StateDoc]

- When a property has an associated property wrapper `@State`, SwiftUI knows that it needs to persist the storage across multiple updates of the same view.
- Mark `@State` property as private, to really enforce the idea that state is **owned and managed** by that view specifically.
- `@State` properties are a special case of state variables, as SwiftUI knows when they change. 
- And because SwiftUI knows that the `@State` variables change the view `body` look, SwiftUI knows that the view rendering depend on their state.
- When a `@State` property changes, in the runtime SwiftUI will recompute the body of that view and all of its children. 
- All the changes always flow down through your view hierarchy. 
- We're able to do these re-rendering very efficiently because SwiftUI compares the views and renders again only what is changed.
- **Views are a function of state, not of a sequence of events**.

## [`@Binding`][BindingDoc]

- By using the `Binding` property wrapper, we define an explicit dependency to a source of truth without owning it.

- We don't need to provide an initial value because the binding can be derived from a state.
- Primitives views such as `Toggle`, `TextField`, and `Slider` all expect a binding.
We can read and write a `@binding` property (without owning it!)

## Publishers (External changes)

- In case the event comes from an external source (a.k.a. not within the views), we use `Combine`’s [`Publisher`s][pubDoc]
- It's very important for `View`s to receive events on the main thread.

## `ObservableObject` (External Data)

- When the data is outside our View, swiftUI needs to know how to react on changes of that data
- By making our external data conform to [`ObservableObject`][observableDoc] protocol, we are required to have a publisher, accessible via the synthesized [`objectWillChange`][willChangeDoc] property, that fires every time the data is about to change.
- All we need to do later is to associate an `@ObservedObject` property wrapper in the model and pass the `ObservedObject` to the view in its initialization.
- While SwiftUI `View`s are value types (`Struct`s), any time we're using a reference type, we should be using the `@ObservedObject` property wrapper: this way SwiftUI will know when that data changes and can keep our view hierarchy up to date.

## Environment

- Thanks to the `.environment` modifier, we can add our `ObservableObject`s into the environment.
- By using this [`@EnvironemntObject`][envObj] property wrapper, we can create a dependency to these environment objects. 

## Object Binding vs Environment

- We can build your whole app with `@Binding`, but it can get kind of cumbersome to pass around the model from view to view.
- `EnvironmentObject` is a convenience for passing data around your hierarchy indirectly (without the need to pass the object to each view first).

## `@State` vs `@ObservedObject`

- `@State` is great for data that's view **local**, a value type, managed.
- `@State` is allocated, created and managed by SwiftUI
- `@State` is value type

- `@ObservedObject` is for representing **external data** to SwiftUI, such as a database.
- `@ObservedObject` is storage that **we** manage, which makes it great for the model that we already have.
- `@ObservedObject` is managed by us
- `@ObservedObject` is reference type

[StateDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/state
[BindingDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/binding
[ToggleDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/toggle
[TextFieldDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/textfield
[SliderDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/slider
[PubDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/combine/publisher
[observableDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/combine/observableobject
[willChangeDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/combine/observableobject/3362556-objectwillchange
[envObj]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/environmentobject