---
contributors: zntfdr
---

- `View` always has the size of its body
- The `rootView` has the dimensions of the device minus the safe area insets.
- The top layer of any view with a body is always what we call **layout neutral**. Because its view bounds are define by the bounds of its body, regardless of what’s _above_.

## Layout Process

Three steps:

1. The root view offers our view a proposed size (the safe layout area)
2. The view answers with the size it would like
3. The root view, know with its child view size knowledge, put the child somewhere (by default at the center of its size, both vertically and horizontally)

In SwiftUI there's no way to force a size on the view's child: the parent has to respect that choice. 

In short:

1. Parent proposes a size for child
2. Child chooses its own size
3. Parent places child in parent’s coordinate space
4. (Bonus) SwiftUI rounds coordinates to the nearest pixel

## Views sizes

Since every view controls its own size, it means when we build a view, we get to decide how and when it resizes. 

The bounds of a `Text` view never stretch beyond the height and width of its displayed lines.

When we need to fight for space, especially in stack views, we can raise the layout priority by setting the view [`layoutPriority`][layoutPriorityDoc] (`0` by default).

## Custom Alignment

Need of an alignment between views of different stacks?

We can achieve so by creating an extension of [`VerticalAlignment`][verticalAlignemntDoc] (or any other alignment), and then use that as our [`.alignmentGuide`][guideDoc] in the interested views.

[layoutPriorityDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/view/3278584-layoutpriority
[verticalAlignemntDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/verticalalignment
[guideDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/view/3278504-alignmentguide