---
contributors: zntfdr
---

## Bonjour
Bonjour is how you advertise and discover services on the network.

- Used anytime you print with AirPrint, connect to an airplane-enabled device, use HomeKit to automate your home, really anytime you are connecting to something without typing in an IP address or a host name. 
- Available on Linux, Android, Chrome OS, it's how Chromecast does discovery. Microsoft added Bonjour support to Windows 10 back in 2015.
- A few improvements behind the scenes.

## Building Framing Protocols

TL;DR: we can now create our own communication protocol that lets different devices communicate with each other efficiently. We define the payload etc.

Used to encapsulate and encode application messages.

Two steps:

1. Implement a reusable framing protocol (NWProtocolFramerImplementation). Implement a reusable piece of code that defines your message framing. This is the protocol. 
2.Add the framing protocol to a connection
Add that protocol into your connection's protocol stacks so that you can use it for connection establishment as well as sending and receiving message. 

## Collecting Metrics

We have now more info on our connections. 

## Status Update

For privacy, `CNCopyCurrentNetworkInfo` is more restricted now.

To access to this info, the app must also meet at least one of the criteria below:

- Apps with permission to access location
- Currently enabled VPN app
- `NEHotspotConfiguration` (only Wi-Fi networks that the app configured)

Otherwise, it returns nil.
