---
contributors: zntfdr
---

In this session more Combine operators are introduced:

- `map`, `tryMap`, `decode`, `assertNoFailure`, `retry`, `catch`, `mapError`, `setFailureType` ...

- `Just`: special `Publisher` for when you already have a value that you want to publish. It’s called `Just`, as in just publish this value.

## Scheduled Operators

- Describes when and where a particular event is delivered
- Supported by `RunLoop` and `DispatchQueue`
- Delay: defers the delivery of an event until some future time. 
- Throttle: guarantees that events are delivered no faster than a specified rate.
- `Receive(on:)`: guarantees that downstream received events will be delivered on a particular thread or queue. 

## Subscriber

Subscribers have three functions:

1. `receive(subscription:)` when subscribing the publisher will call this function exactly once
2. `receive(_:)` the publisher will provide 0 or more values via this method
3. `receive(completion:)` the publisher can eventually provide a completion only once, meaning that it has completed or a failure has risen

Once `receive(completion:)` is called, no further value will be forwarded.

## Special Subscriptions

### `Sink`

Just provide a closure and now for every value received, the closure is going to get called with the value.

This `Sink` will return a `canceller`, which is like a token where we can call cancel when we no longer want to get new values.

### `Subjects`

Behaves like Publisher and Subscriber.

Supporting multi casting a single value (broadcast to multiple subscribers)

Two kinds of subjects:

- `Passthrough`: doesn’t store any value, therefore we’ll get a value only once a new one will be sentWe can inject a passthrough subjects in a stream by calling `onePublisher.share()`
- `CurrentValue`: like `Passthrough`, however it stores the last value, so new subscribers have an opportunity to catch up

## SwiftUI

- SwiftUI owns the subscriber
- We only need to provide a publisher

### `@BindableObject`

- `@BindableObject`s in SwiftUI have a single associated type. 
- It's a Publisher that is constrained to never fail.

Example:

```swift
class WizardModel: BindableObject { 
	var trick: WizardTrick { didSet { didChange.send() }
	var wand: Wand? { didSet { didChange.send() } 

	let didChange PassthroughSubject<Void, Never>()
}

struct TrickView: View { 
  @ObjectBinding var model: WizardModel 

  var body: some View { 
  	Text(model.trick.name)
  }
}
```

- `@ObjectBinding` allows SwiftUI to automatically discover and subscribe to our Publisher.
- SwiftUI will automatically generate a new body whenever we signal that the model has changed. 
- Note how the “combine upstream” value is `Void`, we do not use as the `View` owns the model anyway, so we can access it from there instead.

### `@Published`

- Adds a publisher to a property
- Access the the published via wrapped value (in the example below, `$password` is the publisher aka wrapped value)

```swift
@Published var password: String 

self.password = "1234"

let currentPassword: String = self.password

let printerSubscription = $password.sink {
	print("The published value is '\($0)'")
} 

self. password = "password" 
```

### `eraseToAnyPublisher`

Advertise the exact contract we want for our API boundary and hide all the implementation details along the way.

Example:

```swift
@Published var username: String = "" 

var validatedUsername: AnyPublisher<String, Never> {
	return $username 
    .debounce(for: 0.5, scheduler: RunLoop.main)
    .removeDuplicates()
    .eraseToAnyPublisher() 
}
```

Further example with Future:

```swift
@Published var username: String = ""

var validatedUsername: AnyPublisher<String?, Never> { 
	return $username 
    .debounce (for: 0.5, scheduler: RunLoop.main) 
    .removeDuplicates()
    .flatMap { username in 
    	return Future { promise in 
        self.usernameAvailable(username) { available in
        	promise (.success(available ? username : nil))
        }
      }
    } 
    .eraseToAnyPublisher() 
}
```

### `AnyCancellable`

- What is returned after creating a subscriber
- This class automatically calls `cancel()` on `deinit`. 