---
contributors: zntfdr
---

The Swift Package Manager makes it easier to develop and distribute source code in the Swift ecosystem.

## Why a package manager in Swift?

- great cross-platform tool for building your Swift code.
- makes it easy to configure your code in a consistent way and run it on all of Swift's supported platforms.
- includes its own complete build system, allowing you to configure your software, build it, test it, and even run it from one tool.
- new standard for distributing libraries.

## How to use it

SwiftPM consists of four command tools at the top level `swift` Command:

- `$ swift build` to build your package
- `$ swift run` to run your package executable products
- `$ swift test` to run your package tests
- `$ swift package` (to run various non-build operations on the package)

### Create a package

Use `$ swift package init` to create a new library package, add `--type executable` to create an executable package.

This command creates the package in the current directory, the package will be composed with:

- a `Package.swift` manifest file, which describes the structure of the package.
- a basic `README.md`
- the `Sources` directory with a subfolder for our package target
- the `Tests` directory where we can add unit tests

## The anatomy of a package

A package is composed by three main parts:

- dependencies
- targets
- products

### Dependencies

- Swift packages that you can use when developing your package features.
- Each dependency provides one or more products such as libraries that your package can use.
- Each dependency has a source location and it is versioned.

### Targets

- Basic building blocks of packages.
- Describes how to build a set of source files into either a module or a test suite.
- Targets can depend on other targets of the same package and on products exported from other packages, declared as dependencies.
- A target can contain any C language (C, C++, ObjC) or Swift, both language families are allowed, but not in the same target (they must be separate).

### Products

- Products are executable to libraries and products are assembled from the build artifacts of one or more target.
- Packages provide libraries for other packages by defining products.

## The design of SwiftPM

SwiftPM follows Swift's philosophy:

- Safe: isolated build environment
- Fast: scalable to large dependency graphs
- Expressive: Swift language manifest format

### Building a package

- SwiftPM uses [`llbuild`][llbuild] to build a package: `llbuild` is a set of libraries for building build systems, it's built around a general purpose and reusable build engine.
- SwiftPM builds packages in isolation: ensures that even packages with complex requirements can be reliably built and used in different environments.
- builds are sandboxed: nothing can write to arbitrary locations on the file system during the build.
- No arbitrary commands or shell scripts during a build: This allows SwiftPM to fully understand any package build graph and all of its inputs and outputs to do fast, correct incremental builds.

### Workflow features

- Edit Mode: allows overwriting a specific package with a local copy, so that temporary edits can be made, and changes to transitive dependencies can be tested without having to forward all packages in the graph upfront.
- Branch dependencies: (works only on development mode) allows your package to have dependencies targeting a branch instead of using the dependency versioning

[llbuild]: https://github.com/apple/swift-llbuild
