---
contributors: zntfdr
---

This is a non technical discussion on Design Quality, divided into four themes: Interpretation, Significance, Aspirations, Techniques.

## Interpretation

Characteristics ‘not random’, ‘well crafted’, a lot of **care** and time went into it, people can feel it (without knowing what they are feeling), it feels like state of the art, people feel overpowered/more productive by it, and consistently cohesive details.  
The takeaway here is that quality is never about the UI, the UX, but about the people using the staff you make it for.

## Significance

In sum the little details and inconsistencies affect the interpretation of the Product. Quality is not something stated, it is communicated and felt through the product. Quality emanates when using the product.  
Quality **invokes trust** in the people using your app.

## Aspirations

Design should aspire to be simple, instantly understandable, and focused. Visual design and **polish** and clarity of rules and achieve. Active discovery is a more effective way to communicate rules for a system. Users are more likely to remember a “rule” if it is self learned, rather than a tooltip.  
Design should be durable (or, even better, timeless)

## Techniques

- Assemble extreme “**caricatures**” if ideas to the problems of a solution
- **Prototype** with real users, you can’t assume things are going to work
- Take **feedback** to reduce bias, don’t be defensive regarding the feedback given, people are genuinely criticizing your work for your own good, they’re not trying to attack you (there’s a super nice session from 2014/15 about this, )
- **Know what you don’t know** and ask questions
- Talk about **communication** (more direct, less drama)