---
contributors: RamitSharma991
---

Text plays a crucial role in every application. It's the primary way to consume information and communicate. Here are the tools to create a powerful text experience in your app:

## Changes to System selection UI

* a completely redesigned text cursor on all platforms.
* an inline, interactive switcher when changing input languages.
* more ergonomic selection handles when doing range selection.
* a completely new loupe to make it easier to place the cursor in large bodies of text.
* works with `UITextViews` or `UITextFields` automatically.
* clients of `UITextInteraction` also gets the new selection UI.
* for a highly customized UI displaying text added `UITextSelectionDisplayInteraction`
  * `UITextSelectionDisplayInteraction` is a new type of `UIInteraction` that can be installed on any UIView.
  * must adopt `UITextInput` protocol.
  * provides the cursor view and cursor accessories and the range highlight and selection handles.
  * All of these views are replaceable.

```swift
 // Add selection display interaction
 let selectionDisplayInteraction = UITextSelectionDisplayInteraction(textInput: document, delegate: self)
 view.addInteraction(selectionDisplayInteraction)

 // call this whenever selection changes in your document
 selectionDisplayInteraction.setNeedsSelectionUpdate()
```

* added a new API for displaying a loupe namely Text loupe.
  * new `UITextLoupeSession` object for displaying loupe.
  * can be used on any view.
  * `UITextSelectionDisplayInteraction` or `UITextInput` isn't required to use it.
  * recommended to use a gesture recognizer, such as `UIPanGestureRecognizer` to drive the loupe's updates.

## Text item actions and menus

* much more customizable using new APIs on `UITextViewDelegate`
* makes it possible to modify the primary action for text items.
* New methods on `UITextViewDelegate`

```swift
func textView(_ textView: UITextView, primaryActionFor textItem: UITextItem, defaultAction: UIAction) -> UIAction?

func textView(_ textView: UITextView, menuConfigurationFor textItem: UITextItem, defaultMenu: UIMenu) -> UITextItem.MenuConfiguration?
```

* Text items represent the content that support item interactions.
* includes text attachments, represented by `NSTextAttachment`, and links, represented by `NSLinkAttributeName`
* `UITextItem` now also supports tagging custom ranges of text for interaction.
* use the `UITextItemTagAttributeName` on the attributed string representing the range of text you wish to make interactive.
* now possible to change the default tap or menu behavior when a text item is interacted with.
* redirect known links to existing views within the app or add custom menus to parts of the text.
   
## Lists and bullets in TextKit 2
* Supports several different kinds of bullets.
* Automatic numbering of items.
* Localized for every language.

```swift
let textList = NSTextList(markerFormat: .circle, option: 0)
let mutableParagrapghStyle = NSMutableParagraphStyle()
mutableParagraphStyle.textLists = [textList]

textStorage.addAttribute(.paragraphStyle, value: mutableParagraphStyle, range: NSRange(location: 0, textStorage.length))
```

## Dictation on MacOS

* while scrolling, the indicator next to the cursor will stick to the edge of the scroll view, and offer a button to return to the current position in the document.
* If you're using a standard text control in AppKit like NSTextView, you'll get this behavior right out of the box.
* `NSTextInsertionIndicator` is a new API for macOS that also allows to remain consistent with the system's selection UI
  * System-provided insertion point
  * Customizable
  * Follows current accent color
  * Supports dictation effects

```swift
//code example to add NSTextInsertionIndicator
let insertIndicator = NSTextInsertionIndicator(frame: .zero)
documentView.addSubview(insertIndicator)

//Block to handle effect views added by system
insertionIndicator.effectsViewInserter = { view in
documentView.addSubview(view, positioned: .below, relativeTo: insertionIndicator)
}

func didLoseFocus() {
// When resigning first responder, make sure to hide cursor.
insertionIndicator.display = .hidden
}
```

  * updates to the frame will automatically be animated with a glow effect.
  * to disable the glow effect, remove the `showEffectsView` option from `automaticModeOptions`
  * after changing input modes, an effect view is displayed beneath the cursor in horizontal text to show the language selection UI.
  * to override the placement of this UI, specify `preferredTextAccessoryPlacement` in your implementation of `NSTextInputClient`
* adopt `NSTextInputClient` and implement the `selectionRect` and `documentVisibleRect`
* Notify the system about scrolling beginning and ending.


## Internationalization

* Dynamic line-height adjustments
  * automatically adjust the line height in `UILabel` or `UITextField`
  * depends on preferred languages in Language and region settings.
  * independent of actual language of content.
  * only affects text elements that use text styles.
  * use `UIFont.preferredFont(forTextStyle:)`
  * make sure `clipsToBounds = false`
  * Ascenders and descenders for languages like Thai and Hindi will often protrude beyond the line height bounds.
  * Respond to changes in vertical.
 
* Wrapping and hyphenation
  * Improved line breaking for Chinese, German, Japanese, and Korean.
  * Optimized for text style and language.
  * Adopt text styles.
