---
contributors: lordmooch
---

- **Presenter:** Philippe Hauser, Software Engineer
- **Super power:** Observant. Sees everything.
- **Length:** 12m, Supports Copy Code

# Observation

- Magical new feature in Swift.
- Define models with standard Swift syntax - UI will respond to changes to the model.
- Geared towards SwiftUI - “seamless and intuitive”.
- Easy to update code from `@ObservableObject` **property wrapper** to the `@Observable` **macro**.

## What is observation?

- Tracks changes to properties.
- Normal Swift types transformed with **macro magic**.

Consider your current model…

```Swift
class FoodTruckModel {

    var orders: [Order] = []
    
    var donuts = Donut.all
    
}
```

To make SwiftUI respond to changes in that model…

```Swift
@Observable class FoodTruckModel {

    var orders: [Order] = []
    
    var donuts = Donut.all
    
}
```

`@Observable` is a **macro**.

- It transforms your type into something that is able to be observed.
- You don’t need any Property Wrappers* to make this just work - no more `@Published` annotations required.
- SwiftUI knows that your code accesses specific properties in the body call.
- When body is executed, SwiftUI tracks access to properties of `@Observable` types.
- Now SwiftUI can detect when properties on those specific instances will change.
- Important: if your property isn’t accessed, SwiftUI won’t track it and won’t invalidate the view if the property changes.
- Computed properties will be tracked if they refer to a stored property.

In the model above, if your view uses `donuts` then SwiftUI will track changes to it. If your view does not use `orders`, SwiftUI won’t track it - so you can make changes to `orders` without causing a view redraw.

Expect performance improvements as SwiftUI won’t redraw if a non-tracked property changes - only changes to tracked properties will cause a UI redraw.

## Property Wrappers

SwiftUI property wrappers are simplified to an “all the best things comes in threes” approach: `@State`, `@Environment`, `@Bindable`

**`@State`**

- If a View needs its own state use `@State`.
- Managed by the lifetime of the View it’s contained in.

**`@Environment`**

- Propagate values as globally accessible throughout an app.

- `@Observable` types work great with this.

**`@Bindable`**

- Newest member of the Property Wrappers.
- Lightweight - allows bindings to be created for the type.
- Uses $ syntax as before - `$myType.myProperty`.
- Bindings are read/write - we read from it, but we can write back to the Property too.

### How do I decide which to use?

- If the state is part of the View itself - use `@State`
- If the model is required globally - use `@Environment`
- If we only need bindings - use `@Bindable`
- If No is the answer to all three questions - use the model as a property of your view: `var model: MyModel`
- SwiftUI can observe arrays of your model types. Your model types can also contain other `@Observable` model types.
- General rule - if a used property changes, SwiftUI updates the view.
- We can break this rule with computed properties - if they do not reference any stored property, SwiftUI won’t update the view.
- This can be un-broken though - 2 extra steps required: tell Observation when the property is **accessed** and when the property **changes**.
- Usually not required - most computed properties use some stored property anyway.
- Observation just works for stored properties and computed properties that reference stored properties.
- For computed properties that don’t reference stored properties, we have manual control to make Observation work.
- We can easily replace `@ObservableObject` with `@Observable`.
- Good chance of seeing a performance boost too!

**Before…**

```Swift
public class FoodTruckModel: ObservableObject {
	@Published public var truck = Truck()
	@Published public var orders: [Order] = []
	@Published public var donuts: Donut.all
…
}
```

**After…**

```Swift
@Observable public class FoodTruckModel {
	public var truck = Truck()
	public var orders: [Order] = []
	public var donuts: Donut.all
…
}
```

And in SwiftUI

**Before…**

```Swift
struct AccountView: View {
	
   @ObservedObject var model: FoodTruckModel

   @EnvironmentObject private var accountStore: AccountStore
   @Environment(\.authorizationController) private var authorizationController
…
}
```

**After…**

```Swift
struct AccountView: View {

   var model: FoodTruckModel

   @Environment(AccountStore.self) private var accountStore
   @Environment(AuthorizationController.self) private var authorizationController
…
}
```

- Mostly you will just change annotations.
- Or simplify your view down to the 3 primary Property Wrappers: `@State`, `@Environment`, `@Bindable`.
- Fewer options to consider - Views should be easier to reason about.

## Takeaways

- `@Observable` is a **macro** for automating property observation.
- Can be overridden manually in specific cases if required.
- New projects should use `@Observable`.
- Simplifies models and views.
- Performance boost.


* No Property Wrappers were hurt in the making of `@Observable`
