---
contributors: Cecile-Lebleu
---

Speaker: Hemant Sawle, Commerce Developer Advocate 

## StoreKit Testing in Xcode

StoreKit Testing in Xcode allows local testing. Added in WWDC20.

- StoreKit configuration file to create and manage IAPs.
- Perform local testing of in app purchases
- Use simulator or device to test.
- Leverage StoreKitTest framework to automate testing IAPs.
- Sync products from AppStore Connect to Xcode: so configuration file doesn’t need to be created manually.
- Supports advance subscription use cases, like offer code redemption, price increase sheet, and subscriptions entering and exiting billing retry.
- Flexible subscription renewal rate, from real-time to every 2 seconds.

**New in Xcode 15:**

- Static renewal rates, independent of subscription duration.
- Simulate StoreKit errors to build better error handling.
- If running multiple instances of your app, the transaction manager will display transactions for each app instance.
- Transactions manager also allows buying IAPs directly, to test external transactions.

Learn more in the session *“What’s new in StoreKit 2 and StoreKit Testing in Xcode”* from WWDC23

## App Store Sandbox

App Store Sandbox allows testing products set up in App Store Connect on client and server.

Prerequisites:

- Accept Paid Applications agreement
- Registered device with your developer account
- Create Sandbox Apple ID to make purchases in App Store Connect > Users & Access
- Enable developer mode on device, in Privacy Settings

Sandbox enables testing production-like scenarios like purchases, restores, and subscription offers. Distribute the app directly to the device from Xcode, or using a distribution method like Release Testing, Debugging, or Custom (to generate an IPA file).

### Billing Problem message simulation (new)

- Available in sandbox, it will be available for customers in production when they enter billing retry.
- Uses StoreKit 2 message API with reason `billingIssue`.
- Implement a message listener in views to defer or suppress the message
- Simulate `billingIssue` message in sandbox to test how your app handles the message presentation.
- To trigger this, the sandbox Apple ID needs to be subscribed to an auto-renewable subscription. In the device, go to App Store Settings > Account Settings and disable "Allow Purchases & Renewals". Then, go back to your app and the billing issue message will appear.

Learn more about implementing StoreKit 2 Message API in *"What's new with in-app purchase"* from WWDC22

### Billing Grace Period (new)

Grace period allows users to maintain access to paid features while payment is being collected, without interruption.

- Go to App Store Connect > App > Subscriptions > Billing Grace Period.
- The durations shown only apply to production; in testing, the sandbox account's renewal rate is used.

### Family Sharing (new)

Allow customers to share digital purposes with their family members.

- Go to App Store Connect > App > Subscriptions / Non-Consumable Products > enable Family Sharing
- Organize Sandbox Family Sharing in App Store Connect
- Make a purchase with sandbox Apple ID
- Go to App Store Connect > Users and access > Family Sharing
- To stop sharing, go to the device's settings, Account Settings > Family Sharing > Stop sharing

Family Sharing in Sandbox allows validating:

- Merchandise family-shareable products using StoreKit's `isFamilyShareable` 
- Validate app logic to entitle service for family members
- Revoke access for family members, validate with `revocationDate` available in JWSTransactions
- Receive App Store Server Notifications for family members

Learn more in the Tech Talk session *"Explore Family Sharing for in-app purchases."* 

### iOS sandbox Account Settings (new)

Options only available in App Store Connect are now available on-device for testing. Go to App Store settings > Sandbox Account > Manage, to find Renewal Rate, Test Interrupted Purchases, and Clear Purchase History.

## TestFlight

TestFlight allows end to end beta testing and feedback from testers. Overview:

- Distribute app across all platforms
- Add internal and external testers
- Automatic updates
- Builds valid for 90 days

Learn more in the Tech Talk session *"Get started with TestFlight"*

When testing in-app purchases:

- Builds are downloaded using TestFlight app
- Uses Apple ID signed into Media & Purchases
- In-app purchases are free
- Subscription renewal rates are accelerated, equivalent to Sandbox
- If the app has implemented StoreKit's `showManageSubscription`, you can test subscription cancellation or change subscription.

**New:**

- Manage TestFlight testers: filter tester data like status, sessions, and bulk selection.
- Internal Only distribution makes the build only available to internal testers, and it cannot be submitted to App Store.
Learn more in the sessions *"What's new in App Store Connect"* and *"Simplify distribution in Xcode and Xcode Cloud"* from WWDC23.
