---
contributors: MortenGregersen
---

Speaker: Julia Vashchenko, SwiftUI Engineer

This is a code-along. The sample project includes both the starting point and how the project should look after the session.

Download the sample project here: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/SwiftUI/Building-a-document-based-app-using-SwiftData

## @Observable

- Set up data flow with less code
- Automatic dependencies
- Seamlessly bind models' mutable state to UI

*See more in the session "Discover Observation with SwiftUI".*

## @Query (Property wrapper)

```swift
@Query(sort: \.created) private var cards: [Card]
```

- Provides the view with data
- Triggers view update on every change of the models
- A view can have multiple `@Query` properties
- Uses `ModelContext` as the source of data

`@Query` needs a model context for it to work. We get the model context from the model container.

## modelContainer (View modifier)

```swift
.modelContainer(for: Card.self)
```

- Sets up the model container
- Creates the storage stack
- A view has a single model container

An app needs to set up at least one model container. Model containers are inherited in by the views (like `.environment()`). Different windows (or views inside windows) can have different model containers.

## modelContext (Environment variable)

```swift
@Environment(\.modelContext) private var modelContext
```

- Provides access to the model context
- A view has a single model context

Like the model container, a view has a single context, but a application can have multiple.

> This environment variable was populated automatically when we set the model container earlier.

About saving the context:
> You might think that after inserting the model, you need to save the context, calling "modelContext.save()," but you don't need to do that. A nice detail about SwiftData is that it autosaves the model context. The autosaves are triggered by UI-related events and user input. We don’t need to worry about saving because SwiftData does it for us. There are only a few cases when you want to make sure that all the changes are persisted immediately, for example, before sharing the SwiftData storage or sending it over. In these cases, call "save()" explicitly.

## DocumentGroup

On iOS and macOS instead of the `WindowGroup` we can use the `DocumentGroup`. This makes the app a document based app.

- You have to set up a custom `contentType`/file format for your documents.
- The content type has to be set up in Info.plist with the same identifier as you use in code.
- The content type set up in Info.plist needs to conform to `com.apple.package`.
- You should NOT set up an `.modelContainer` for the `DocumentGroup`, as it does it automatically.
