---
contributors: kslazinski
---

## Inspector

- It's a new element in SwiftUI
- Inspector is a view that shows details of selected content
- Inspector is available to SwiftUI Developers on macOS and iPadOS and iOS
- Users are familiar with inspectors as they are already present in many apps, for example Keynote or Shortcuts.
- .inspector is an addition to other SwiftUI Structural APIs like: NavigationSplitView, NavigationStack, .sheet, .popover, .alert, .confirmationDialog 

## Functionalities

The inspector API includes programmatic control over:
- column width
- presented state (allowing hiding and showing of the inspector as needed)

In compact size classes, inspector adapts to a resizable sheet and inspector will automatically overlay in split screen on larger iPads.

## How to

To add an inspector to a SwiftUI view, we use .inspector modifier.
Example:
```
.inspector(isPresented: $presented) {
  InspectorForm(item: $state.binding())
}
```

Inspectors can collapse by default, but they aren't resizable by default. We can change it with .inspectorColumnWidth. We can also add a toolbar button to toggle the "presented" property.
Example:
```
.inspector(isPresented: $presented) {
  InspectorForm(item: $state.binding())
    .inspectorColumnWidth(min: 200, ideal: 300, max: 400)
    .toolbar {
      Spacer()
      Button{
        presented.toggle()
      } label: {
        Label("Toggle Inspector", systemImage: "info.circle")
      }
    }
}
```

## Placement

If you are using an inspector within a NavigationSplitView, the inspector should be placed in the detail column's view builder, or it can also be placed entirely outside the navigation structure.

## Presentation customizations

Presentation customizations in iOS 16.4:
- Apart from new .inspector modifier, SwiftUI offers now more customization of sheets and other presentations like popovers.
- .presentationBackground modifier sets a background of a presentation 
- We can interact with the content behind the presentation thanks to .presentationBackgroundInteraction(.enabled)

More available customizations:

- .presentationBackground(_:)
- .presentationBackgroundInteraction(_:)
- .presentationCornerRadius(_:)
- .presentationContentInteraction(_:)
- .presentationCompactAdaptation(_:)

These modifiers also work with Inspector when Inspector is presenting as a sheet.
