---
contributors: RamitSharma991, rusik
---

* SwiftUI makes it easy to build complex, powerful apps, offering a large set of features and complex controls like lists and tables.
* As the app's complexity grows, performance becomes more important. 
* Small issues can get amplified, and code that works well for a prototype might not work as well in production.
* Performance problems start with **Symptoms** like: 
    * slow navigation pushs
    * broken animations
    * a spinning wait cursor on macOS
* Post identifying a performance problem, the first step towards addressing it is to **Measure**.
* After measuring and verifing that the symptom exists, work on identifying its cause.
* **Identification** is tricky, requires intuition as bugs arise from incorrect assumption. 
* After identifying the root cause, fix the issue through Optimization. 
* Re-measure and Re-verify any fix to prevent performance problems after optimization.
* Post verification, if the problem is resolved, break the loop.

## Prerequisites
- Identity (implicit and explicit)
- View lifetime and View Identity.
- [Demystify SwiftUI WWDC21](https://developer.apple.com/wwdc21/10022)

# Dependencies 
* Views form a graph and SwiftUI looks at dependencies when evaluating code.
* Each child view is dependent on the view value that gets produced by its ancestor but  there are other forms of dependencies too. 
* Dynamic properties are a common source of dependencies.
* Explore dependencies:
    * Use `Self._printChanges`
    * Used as the LLDB command `expression Self._printChanges`
    * printChanges, is for debugging only, has a runtime impact
    * to check if a view might have extra dependencies

*Example code continuing from Demystify SwiftUI WWDC21 for scalable Dog image + printChanges*

```swift
struct ScalableDogImage: View {
  @State private var scaleToFill = false
  var dog: Dog

  var body: some View {

    // It is never guaranteed to always exist and may even be removed in a future release,
    // so never submit a call to this method to the app store.
    let _ = Self._printChanges()

    dog.image
      .resizable()
      .aspectRatio(contentMode: scaleToFill ? .fill : .fit)
      .frame(maxHeight: scaleToFill ? 500 : nil)
      .padding(.vertical, 16)
      .onTapGesture {
        withAnimation { scaleToFill.toggle() }
      }
  }
}
```

### View update tips
- Eliminate unnecessary dependencies
- Extract views if needed
- Explore using Observable. 

# Faster view updates
* Symptoms of slow SwiftUI updates: reduced responsiveness, such as hangs and hitches.
* **Hangs**:
    * Delays in responding to interaction, like a view taking a long time to initially appear. 
    * [Use Instruments to identify hangs](https://developer.apple.com/wwdc23/10248)
* **Hitches**:
    * User-perceivable animation issue like a pause during scrolling or skipped frames of an animation.
    * The root causes of hangs and hitches, especially in SwiftUI, are often related.

## Common sources of slow updates
- Dynamic Property instantiation, such as allocating and initializing a state object or initializing state.
- Expensive view body: a dynamic property could be computed from a view's body, making the view expensive to evaluate.
- Make sure to check for expensive string interpolation or operations like data filtering and other work inside of body.
- Slow identification.

```swift

// accessing model.dogs in the body lazily instantiates the object,
// which brings us to the initializer, which fetches the list of dogs.
// As the code comment says, this could take a long time. This is synchronous work.
struct DogRootView: View {
  @State private var model = FetchModel()
    
  var body: some View {
      DogList(model.dogs)
  }
}

@Observable class FetchModel {
  var dogs: [Dog]
    
  init() {
      fetchDogs()
  }
}
    
  func fetchDogs() {
    // Takes a long time
  }
}

// Updated and fixed using task modifier, asynchronous fetch and awaiting.
struct DogRootView: View {
  @State private var model = FetchModel()
    
  var body: some View {
    DogList(model.dogs)
      .task { await model.fetchDogs() }
  }
}

@Observable class FetchModel {
  var dogs: [Dog]
    
  init() {}
    
  func fetchDogs() async {
    // Takes a long time
  }
}
```

## Other hidden sources of work
- String Interpolation: make sure to cache any strings you might need to frequently use.
- Bundle lookup
- Heap allocation

# Identity in List and Table
* support rich features beyond a simple layout, adding selection, swipe actions, reordering support, and more. 
* These are complex, advanced controls, and understanding identity is critical to ensuring they perform well in your app.

## Built in improvements 
- Faster filtering
- Reduced time to show large lists
- Smoother scrolling

## Lists and Tables
- Construction affects performance.
- use identifiers to know what changes occurred to the data.
- Gather IDs eagerly to ensure consistency.

## Why identity matters
- **Animations**: incremental updates to the same view vs a new view
- **Performance**: identifiers are gathered often

## Row identity with Lists and Foreach
- `public struct ForEach<Data, ID, Content>` is the signature for ForEach from SwiftUI.
- ForEach maps a collection of data onto a resulting sequence of views, producing explicit identity for each of its views.
- Lists, it needs to figure out how many rows to display and the identifier for that row.
- List, visits the data collection up front, determining each element's ID.
- The content closure is called to produce each view.
- Rows are created on-demand.
- List uses a composite of the identity and the content to produce a list row.
- The rows created on-demand correlate to the visible region, plus some system-determined buffer for prefetching or accessibility.
- As the view is scrolled, more views become extant.
- Avoid inline filtering.

```swift

// Constant views per element - ✅
List {
  ForEach(dogs) { dog in
    DogCell(dog)
  }
}

// Variable views per element - ⚠️
List {
  ForEach(dogs) { dog in
    if dog.fetchToy == .ball {
      DogCell(dog)
    }
  }
}

// Unknown views per element - ⚠️
List {
  ForEach(dogs) { dog in
    AnyView(...)
  }
}

// Avoid inline filtering - ⚠️
List {
  ForEach(dogs.filter(...)) { dog in
    DogCell(dog)
  }
}

// Cached filter and constant views per element - ✅
List {
  ForEach(tennisBallDogs) { dog in
    DogCell(dog)
  }
}
```

## Tips for ensuring constant counts
- Avoid using `AnyView` in `ForEach` and lopsided conditions.
- Use an explicit stack where appropriate
- Try to flatten nested ForEach constructions

## Table identification 
- TableRow always resolves to a single row.
- Total row count is of `TableRow` instead of views.
- SwiftUI provides a streamlined initializer that allows us to write `ForEach` in data collections and creates the table rows on our behalf.
- While this initializer is new, it back deploys to all previous operating system versions where Table is available.
- It's a simpler construction that enforces a constant number of rows for the ForEach content, which helps with identification performance.
- Explicit Identity in ForEach with Tables:
  - each row gets identified by its value to improve performance.
  - For back deployment, get the old behavior by either mapping over your collection or by explicitly specifying an ID key path.

### Row counts
- Row count in Lists: `Row count = element count x views per element (ensure constant)`
- Row count in Tables: `Row count = element count x TableRows per element (ensure constant)`

## Faster lists and tables 
- Ensure identifiers are inexpensive 
- Consider the number of rows in ForEach content
