---
contributors: JohnBaer3
---

## ELI5 Summary of Macros: 
Imagine you're baking a cake, and you need to sift flour. You have to get out your sifter, pour in the flour, turn the handle... and you have to do this every single time you need sifted flour. Now imagine you had a magical kitchen helper who could do this for you. All you'd have to say is "sift flour" and it's done!
Swift macros are like that magical kitchen helper, but for your code. Instead of you having to write out the same lines of code over and over again, you just tell your macro (your kitchen helper) what to do. This might be something like "create a struct with these properties" or "set up a standard network request".
You define how the macro works one time, and then you can use it whenever you need to. It's a way to automate repetitive tasks and make your code easier to read and manage. This makes coding a lot faster and less prone to errors, especially as your projects get bigger and more complex.

The key benefits of using Swift macros are:
- Code Consistency: Since macros generate code, it ensures that similar code snippets throughout the program are consistent. This is especially important when working in large teams where ensuring code consistency can be a challenge.
- Time Saving: Macros can automate repetitive tasks in your codebase. This can save a lot of time, especially on larger projects.
- Improved Readability and Maintainability: By abstracting away repetitive or complex code into a macro, the resulting code becomes easier to read and maintain.
- Reduced Errors: When repetitive code is generated by macros, it reduces the chance of introducing errors that can occur when manually writing similar code snippets.
In summary, while Swift macros might seem complex at first, especially for a new developer, they are a powerful tool to have in your programming toolkit. They can make your code cleaner, more efficient, and less prone to errors.


## Summary of Macros WWDC Video: 
In Swift 5.9, a new feature called Swift macros was introduced to help developers avoid writing repetitive boilerplate code. Macros generate this repetitive code during compile time, making the codebase more expressive and easier to read.
Macros work similarly to functions, taking parameters and returning an output. They are declared with a role, such as a freestanding expression macro role, indicated by the hash character. If the arguments of the macro expression don't match the macro's parameters or don't type check by themselves, the compiler will emit an error.
Swift macros use a compiler plug-in to parse the source code into a SwiftSyntax tree, a source-accurate, structural representation of the macro. The macro's implementation is a program written in Swift and can perform any transformation to the syntax tree, such as generating a tuple. The updated syntax tree is then serialized into source code and sent back to the compiler, which replaces the macro expression with the expanded code.
Macros can be tested using unit tests, as they don't have side effects and the source code of syntax trees is easy to compare. The SwiftSyntax package includes an 'assertMacroExpansion' function for testing.
Besides freestanding expression macros, there are also freestanding declaration macros that expand to a declaration, and attached macros that augment the declaration they're attached to, spelled with an @. Examples include attached member macros that add new members to the type they're attached to. This can be used to automatically generate repetitive parts of the codebase, such as initializers and computed properties.


## A very simple example of the macro looks like:
```
@freestanding(expression)
macro stringify(_ value: Int) -> (Int, String)

let calculations = [
   #stringify(1 + 1),
   #stringify(2 + 3)
]
```
The above would return the array of tuples
```
[
 (1 + 1, "1 + 1"),
 (2 + 3, "2 + 3")
]
```

## Additional information
To create a new template, open Xcode, and click File, New, Package, then select the Swift Macro template. 
The WWDC video goes further with their example, and goes through developing an initializer macro in a Test Driven Development approach. 

