---
contributors: RamitSharma991
---

- Test runs range from a single test you're running while working on a piece of code to an entire suite with thousands of tests running in CI.
- Test report is where you go to view results for test runs that happen locally,in Xcode Cloud, or on another machine.
- The test report organizes your test results in a way that helps you understand: 
  - the health of your project
  - identify problem areas
  - ultimately fix failures faster

## Structuring tests

* Test methods are the individual tests or methods which validate your source code and produce test results.
* Test classes are groups of test methods and are usually grouped based on the area that's being tested.
* Test bundles are composed of one or more test classes.
* Each bundle houses a single type of test, either Unit or UI. 

### Unit vs UI Tests

* Unit tests help verify a single piece of code, generally a function. 
* Unit tests are short, simple, and run very quickly. 
* UI tests observe the user-facing behavior of your app.
* UI tests make sure your app truly does what you expect it to. 
* Test bundle contains UI tests.
* At the highest level, there are test plans. 
* Test plans contain one or more test bundles, which means a test plan can contain both Unit and UI tests. 
* Test plans, helps setting up configurations to efficiently run your tests under several conditions.

### Configurations

* Important aspect of Test plans.
* tells Xcode how to set up the runtime environment for tests.
* you can test your app in varying Languages and Locations. 
* Test with code coverage to keep track of the quality and coverage of your code as you continue to develop. 
* You can even set up your tests to run many times ensuring all elements of your app are reliably working. 

### Run Destinations

* are the devices where your tests run. 
* When running tests in Xcode's IDE, you can select a single run destination. 
* With Xcode Cloud and xcodebuild command, your tests can have multiple run destinations.

### Tests, configurations, and run destinations working

- The test plan runs on each device once with a configuration enabled. 
- Each method will exit with a test result status, either passed, failed, skipped, or expected failure.
- Xcode runs the full test plan once for each configuration and run destination, resulting in a whole matrix filled with results.
- Result is produced for every test method, configuration, and run destination combination.
- This individual instance is called a test method run.
- Test runs range from a single test you're running while working on a piece of code to an entire suite with thousands of tests running multiple configurations on multiple destinations.

## Explore the test report

* The new test report gives you tools to help you understand your test run, regardless of the number of tests.
* provides a high level summary of your test run, so you can see the big picture before digging into the details. 
* Highlights important patterns, to quickely start investigating.
* Gives you a single place to see test activity, failure information, screenshots, and more.
* improved UI test debugging tools, giving richer failure information.
* The test summary gives an overall understanding of what happens in a test run.
* Easily understandable testing environment. 
* explore any notable patterns found in during test results using Insights. Insights:
  * are the patterns Xcode found while analyzing results across all configurations and run destinations.
  * groups results based on certain criteria.
  * two types of Insights:
    * Common Failure Patterns: groups tests based on similar failure messages.
    * Longest Test Runs: clues you in on which tests in your test bundles are taking longer than the others.
* Within the test section, you can check tests performed during a run and get more details about the test plan. 
* Check special traits that the test plan has, like test repetitions or performance metrics. 
* With  heat map, check tests on each device and configuration.
* Colors and test result counts helps to understand how this run did when compared to the others. 
* if there’re any test failures, there’s quick access to them on the test summary. 
* If there’s a particular failure use this section to start investigating.
* The test report has a ton of awesome new features.
* The activities tab contains three major sections: 
* Test activity: 
  * The test activity lays out the test in a timeline format, where the top-most row is the start of the test.
  * the bottom row is the end, and each row in between is an event which took place in the test. 
* Automation explorer:
  * find moments of video playback related to the selected test activity. This allows a full replay of test. 
* Scrubber: 
    * a linear representation of test run. 
    * locate test events, like taps, swipes, and clicks. 
    * highlights when the device-under-test changes orientation. 
    * failure icon above the scrubber notes where in the test the failure occurred.
* the test report has a test debugging experience that is interactive.
* Clicking on an event in the activities pane updates the automation explorer with the corresponding frame from video playback, to visually understand what's happening at each moment of the test.
* It also moves the scrubber to the right spot, to watch where events are taking place in relation to the full test run.  
* Available on both Xcode and Xcode Cloud. 
