---
contributors: RamitSharma991
---

## Task hierarchy 
- unlocks automatic task cancellation, priority propagation, and useful task-local value behaviors.

### Concurrency in Swift

* Helps us to reason about concurrent code using well-defined points where execution branches off and runs concurrently.
* Automatically implements advanced behaviours. 
* Concurrent execution is triggered when you use an `async let`, a task group, create a task or detached task.
* Results rejoin the current execution at a suspension point, indicated by an `await`
* Structured tasks are created using `async let` and task groups.
* Unstructured tasks are created using `Task` and `Task.detached`
* Structured tasks live to the end of the scope where they are declared and are automatically cancelled when they go out.

***Example of making soup in a kitchen with Unstructured and structured concurrency***

### Unstructured concurrency 

Here we are creating unstructured Tasks to add concurrency to the functions, and awaiting their values when necessary.

```swift
func makeSoup(order: Order) async throws -> Soup {
    let boilingPot = Task { try await stove.boilBroth() }
    let choppedIngredients = Task { try await chopIngredients(order.ingredients) }
    let meat = Task { await marinate(meat: .chicken) }
    let soup = await Soup(meat: meat.value, ingredients: choppedIngredients.value)
    return await stove.cook(pot: boilingPot.value, soup: soup, duration: .minutes(10))
}
```

### Structured concurrency 

- Since we have a known number of child tasks to create, we can use the convenient `async let` syntax.
- These tasks form a structured relationship with their parent task. 

```swift
func makeSoup(order: Order) async throws -> Soup {
    async let pot = stove.boilBroth()
    async let choppedIngredients = chopIngredients(order.ingredients)
    async let meat = marinate(meat: .chicken)
    let soup = try await Soup(meat: meat, ingredients: choppedIngredients)
    return try await stove.cook(pot: pot, soup: soup, duration: .minutes(10))
}

```

## Task cancellation

- used to signal that the app no longer needs the result of a task and the task should stop and either return a partial result or throw an error.
- Structured tasks are cancelled implicitly when they go out of scope.
- call `cancelAll` on task groups to cancel all active children and any future child tasks.
- Unstructured tasks are cancelled explicitly with the `cancel` function.
- Cancelling the parent task results in the cancellation of all child tasks.
- Cancellation is cooperative, so child tasks aren't immediately stopped.

```swift
func makeSoup(order: Order) async throws -> Soup {
    async let pot = stove.boilBroth()

    guard !Task.isCancelled else {
        throw SoupCancellationError()
    }

    async let choppedIngredients = chopIngredients(order.ingredients)
    async let meat = marinate(meat: .chicken)
    let soup = try await Soup(meat: meat, ingredients: choppedIngredients)
    return try await stove.cook(pot: pot, soup: soup, duration: .minutes(10))
}
```

- If throwing a cancellation error instead of returning a partial result, we can call `Task.checkCancellation`, which throws a `CancellationError` if the task was cancelled.
- Cancellation checking is synchronous, so any function, asynchronous or synchronous, that should react to cancellation should check the task cancellation status before continuing. 
- *Polling* for cancellation with `isCancelled` or `checkCancellation` is useful when the task is running.
- `withTaskCancellationHandler` is useful at times when you may need to respond to cancellation while the task is suspended and no code is running.

### Cancellation and async sequences
- the asynchronous for-loop gets a new order before it is cancelled.

```swift
actor Cook {
    func handleShift<Orders>(orders: Orders) async throws
       where Orders: AsyncSequence,
             Orders.Element == Order {

        for try await order in orders {
            let soup = try await makeSoup(order)
            // ...
        }
    }
}
```
- the cancellation may take place while the task is suspended, waiting on the next order.
- use the cancellation handler to detect the cancellation event and break out of the asynchronous for-loop.
- These orders are produced from an `AsyncSequence`
- AsyncSequences are driven by an `AsyncIterator`, which defines an asynchronous `next` function.
- Like with synchronous iterators, the `next` function returns the next element in the sequence, or nil to indicate that we are at the end of the sequence.
- Many AsyncSequences are implemented with a state machine, which we use to stop the running sequence.

```swift
public func next() async -> Order? {
    return await withTaskCancellationHandler {
        let result = await kitchen.generateOrder()
        guard state.isRunning else {
            return nil
        }
        return result
    } onCancel: {
        state.cancel()
    }
}
```

### AsyncSequence state machine

- While actors are great for protecting encapsulated state they can’t really protect the protect the state machine.
- to modify and read individual properties on the state machine actors aren't quite the right tool.
- can't guarantee the order that operations run on an actor, so we can't ensure that our cancellation will run first.
- use `atomics` from the Swift Atomics package, a dispatch queue or locks instead.
- These mechanisms allow us to: 
    - synchronize the shared state
    - avoiding race conditions, while allowing us to cancel the running state machine without introducing an unstructured task in the cancellation handler.

```swift
private final class OrderState: Sendable {
    let protectedIsRunning = ManagedAtomic<Bool>(true)
    var isRunning: Bool {
        get { protectedIsRunning.load(ordering: .acquiring) }
        set { protectedIsRunning.store(newValue, ordering: .relaxed) }
    }
    func cancel() { isRunning = false }
}
```
- Therefore **Task cancellation**:
  - Propagate through the task tree.
  - Seamlessly integrates with throwing errors.
  - Event-driven cancellation handlers or explicit polling.


## Task priority 

- Priority is your way to communicate to the system how urgent a given task is.
- Certain tasks, like responding to a button press, need to run immediately or the app will appear frozen.
- Meanwhile, other tasks, like prefetching content from a server, can run in the background without anyone noticing.
- A *priority inversion* happens when a high-priority task is waiting on the result of a lower-priority task.
- By default, child tasks inherit their priority from their parent.
- If the parent is running in a task at medium priority, all child tasks will also run at medium priority.

### Structured priority escalation

- Lower priority tasks escalate priority when awaited on by a higher priority task.
- Escalation propagates through the task tree.
- Priority remains escalated until the task completes.
- It's not possible to undo a priority escalation.


## Task group patterns

A powerful tool used for limiting and managing concurrency.

Example to see the pattern more clearly: 

```swift
    withTaskGroup(of: Something.self) { group in
    for _ in 0..<maxConcurrentTasks {
        group.addTask { }
    }
    while let <partial result> = await group.next() {
        if !shouldStop { 
            group.addTask { }
        }
    }
}
```

- The initial loop creates up to the maximum number of concurrent tasks, ensuring that we don't create too many.
- Once the maximum number of tasks is running, we wait for one to finish.
- After it finishes and we haven't hit a stopping condition, we create a new task to keep making progress.
- This limits the number of concurrent tasks in the group since we won't start new work until earlier tasks finish.


### Discarding task groups

- `withDiscardingTaskGroup` API is New Swift 5.9  
- Discarding task groups don't hold onto the results of completed child tasks.
- Resources used by tasks are freed immediately after the task finishes.

```swift
	withDiscardingTaskGroup { group in
		group.addTask()
	}
	
	withThrowingDiscardingTaskGroup { group in 
		group.addTask()
	}
```

- We can change the run method to make use of a discarding task group.
- Discarding task groups automatically clean up their children, so there is no need to explicitly cancel the group and clean up.
- The discarding task group also has automatic sibling cancellation.
- If any of the child tasks throw an error, all remaining tasks are automatically cancelled.


```swift
func run() async throws {
    try await withThrowingDiscardingTaskGroup { group in
        for cook in staff.keys {
            group.addTask { try await cook.handleShift() }
        }

        group.addTask { // keep the restaurant going until closing time
            try await Task.sleep(for: shiftDuration)
            throw TimeToCloseError()
        }
    }
}
```

### TaskGroups 

- `DiscardingTaskGroup` releases resources immediately on task completion .
- Use the completion of one task to signal the creation of the next in a TaskGroup.

## Task-local values

- A task-local value is a piece of data associated with a given task, or more precisely, a task hierarchy. 
- It's like a global variable, but the value bound to the task-local value is only available from the current task hierarchy.
- Task-local values are declared as static properties with the `TaskLocal` property wrapper.
- It's a good practice to make the task local optional.

```swift
  @TaskLocal static var orderID: Int?
  @TaskLocal static var cook: String?
```

- Any task that doesn't have the value set will need to return a default value, which is easily represented by a nil optional.
- An unbound task local contains its default value.

```swift
//TaskLocal Values
actor Kitchen {
    @TaskLocal static var orderID: Int?
    @TaskLocal static var cook: String?
    func logStatus() {
        print("Current cook: \(Kitchen.cook ?? "none")")
    }
}

let kitchen = Kitchen()
await kitchen.logStatus()
await Kitchen.$cook.withValue("Sakura") {
    await kitchen.logStatus()
}
await kitchen.logStatus()
```

- Task-local values can't be assigned to explicitly, but must be bound for a specific scope. 
- The binding lasts for the duration of the scope, and reverts back to the original value at the end of the scope.

###  Swift log
- Logging by hand is repetitive and verbose, which leads to subtle bugs and typos. To prevent that we use SwiftLog.
- SwiftLog is a logging API package with multiple backing implementations.
- Allows us to drop in a logging back end that suites your needs without making changes to your server.
- MetadataProvider `Logger.MetadataProvider` is a new API in SwiftLog 1.5 that: 
    - Automatically includes information in Logger.Metadata
    - Good contextual information makes good logs.
    - uses a dictionary-like structure, mapping a name to the value being logged. 
    - Multiple libraries may define their own metadata provider to look for library-specific information.
    - defines a `multiplex` function, which takes multiple metadata providers and combines them into a single object.

```swift
//MetaDataProvider in action
let orderMetadataProvider = Logger.MetadataProvider {
    var metadata: Logger.Metadata = [:]
    if let orderID = Kitchen.orderID {
        metadata["orderID"] = "\(orderID)"
    }
    return metadata
}

let chefMetadataProvider = Logger.MetadataProvider {
    var metadata: Logger.Metadata = [:]
    if let chef = Kitchen.chef {
        metadata["chef"] = "\(chef)"
    }
    return metadata
}
```

- Once we have a metadata provider, we initialize the logging system with that provider, and we're ready to start logging.

```swift
let metadataProvider = Logger.MetadataProvider.multiplex([orderMetadataProvider,
                                                          chefMetadataProvider])

LoggingSystem.bootstrap(StreamLogHandler.standardOutput, metadataProvider: metadataProvider)

let logger = Logger(label: "KitchenService")
```

- The logs automatically include information specified in the metadata provider, so we don't need to worry about including it in the log message.

```swift
//Logging and metadata provider
func makeSoup(order: Order) async throws -> Soup {
    logger.info("Preparing soup order")
    async let pot = stove.boilBroth()
    async let choppedIngredients = chopIngredients(order.ingredients)
    async let meat = marinate(meat: .chicken)
    let soup = try await Soup(meat: meat, ingredients: choppedIngredients)
    return try await stove.cook(pot: pot, soup: soup, duration: .minutes(10))
}
```

Task-local values:
- Attach metadata to the current task
- Inherited y child as well as Task { }
- Low-level building block for context


### Task traces
To trace and profile a concurrent distributed system

#### Swift Distributed Tracing 

- Open source package for server ecosystem.
- Provides an extensible instrumentation API.
- Allows us to leverage the benefits of the task tree across multiple systems to gain insight into performance characteristics and task relationships. 
- Similar to swift Log and Swift Metrics.
- The Swift Distributed Tracing package has an implementation of the `OpenTelemetry` protocol, so existing tracing solutions, like Zipkin and Jaeger, will work out of the box.
- fills in the opaque `waiting for response` in Xcode Instruments with detailed information about what is happening in the server.
- a little different from tracing processes locally.
- Instead of getting a trace per-function, we instrument our code with spans using the `withSpan` API.

```swift
//Profile server-side execution
func makeSoup(order: Order) async throws -> Soup {
    try await withSpan("makeSoup(\(order.id)") { span in
        async let pot = stove.boilWater()
        async let choppedIngredients = chopIngredients(order.ingredients)
        async let meat = marinate(meat: .chicken)
        let soup = try await Soup(meat: meat, ingredients: choppedIngredients)
        return try await stove.cook(pot: pot, soup: soup, duration: .minutes(10))
    }
}
```

- Spans allow us to assign names to regions of code that are reported in the tracing system.
- Spans don't need to cover an entire function.
- They can provide more insight on specific pieces of a given function.
- `withSpan` annotates our tasks with additional trace IDs and other metadata, allowing the tracing system to merge the task trees into a single trace.
- The tracing system has enough information to provide you with insight into the task hierarchy, along with information about the runtime performance characteristics of a task.
- The span name is presented in the tracing UI.
- You'll want to keep them short and descriptive so that you can easily find information about a specific span without clutter.
- We can attach additional metadata with the use of span attributes

```swift
func makeSoup(order: Order) async throws -> Soup {
    try await withSpan(#function) { span in
        span.attributes["kitchen.order.id"] = order.id
        async let pot = stove.boilWater()
        async let choppedIngredients = chopIngredients(order.ingredients)
        async let meat = marinate(meat: .chicken)
        let soup = try await Soup(meat: meat, ingredients: choppedIngredients)
        return try await stove.cook(pot: pot, soup: soup, duration: .minutes(10))
    }
}
```
- Here we've replaced the span name with the `#function` directive to automatically fill the span name with the function name
- used the span attribute to attach the current order ID to the span information reported to the tracer.

### Trace attributes

* Tracing systems usually present the attributes while inspecting a given span.
* Most spans come with HTTP status codes, request and response sizes, start and end times, and other metadata making it easy to track information passing through the system.
* If a task fails and throws an error, that information is also presented in the span and reported in the tracing system.
* Since spans contain both timing information and the relationships of tasks in the tree, it's a helpful way to track down errors caused by timing races and identify how they impact other tasks.

### The distributed of distributed tracing (Visualize traces even across multiple services/nodes)

* Distributed tracing is most powerful when all parts of the system embrace traces, including the HTTP clients, servers, and other RPC systems.
* `Swift Distributed Tracing` leverages task-local values, built on the task trees, to automatically propagate all of the information necessary to produce reliable cross-node traces.
* Structured tasks:
  * unlock the secrets of concurrent systems.
  * provide tools to automatically cancel operations.
  * automatically propagate priority information.
  * facilitate tracing complex distributed workloads.
