---
contributors: RamitSharma991
---


Live Activities are an immersive and glanceable way to keep track of an event or the progress of a task. They have a discrete start and end and provides real-time updates from background app on runtime or remotely using Push Notifications.

## Live Activity overview

* Works with ***ActivityKit framework***, empowering apps to request, update, and manage their lifecycles.
* Declarative programmatic layout with SwiftUI and WidgetKit.
* Explicit user action to begin a Live Activity.
* A Live Activity can be requested when your app is in the foreground. 
* Live Activities are user-moderated similar to Notifications.
* Someone can easily dismiss or turn them off for your app altogether.
* Must support Lock Screen and the Dynamic Island. 
* Update remotely using push notifications.
* Dynamic Island displays Live Activities throughout the system when the app is in the background. 
* When one Live Activity is active, it’s rendered using its `variable-width`, compact presentation.
* The Dynamic Island displays up to two live activities at a time.
* One of these Live Activities appears attached to the TrueDepth camera, while the other renders in its own detached view.
* Both of these Live Activities use their `minimal` presentation.
* Long press a Live Activity to display its `expanded` presentation, giving even more glanceable information.
* In the expanded presentation, views can deep link to different areas within the app. 

### New experiences for Live Activities in iOS 17

* In addition to the Lock screen and Dynamic Island, Live Activities appear in StandBy.
* Now iPad supports Live Activities. 
* Interactive Live Activities 
   * Leverage widget enhancements
   * Add buttons or toggles


## Lifecycle of Live Activities

The Lifecycle of a Live Activity contains four main steps: 

* Request

```swift
// Request Live Activity with initial content state
let adventure = AdventureAttributes(hero: hero)

let initialState = AdventureAttributes.ContentState(
    currentHealthLevel: hero.healthLevel,
    eventDescription: "Adventure has begun!"
)
let content = ActivityContent(state: initialState, staleDate: nil, relevanceScore: 0.0)

let activity = try Activity.request(
    attributes: adventure,
    content: content,
    pushType: nil
)
```
* Update 

```swift
// Update Live activity with new content
let heroName = activity.attributes.hero.name               
let contentState = AdventureAttributes.ContentState(
    currentHealthLevel: hero.healthLevel,
    eventDescription: "\(heroName) has taken a critical hit!"
)

var alertConfig = AlertConfiguration(
    title: "\(heroName) has taken a critical hit!",
    body: "Open the app and use a potion to heal \(heroName)",
    sound: .default
)  
activity.update(
    ActivityContent<AdventureAttributes.ContentState>(
        state: contentState,
        staleDate: nil
    ),
    alertConfiguration: alertConfig
)
```
* Observe activity state

```swift
// Observe activity state asynchronously
func observeActivity(activity: Activity<AdventureAttributes>) {
    Task {
        for await activityState in activity.activityStateUpdates {
            if activityState == .dismissed {
                self.cleanUpDismissedActivity()
            }
        }
    }
}

// Observe activity state synchronously
let activityState = activity.activityState
if activityState == .dismissed {
    self.cleanUpDismissedActivity()
}
```
* End

```swift
// Dismiss Live activity with final content.
let hero = activity.attributes.hero

let finalContent = AdventureAttributes.ContentState(
    currentHealthLevel: hero.healthLevel,
    eventDescription: "Adventure over! \(hero.name) has defeated the boss! Congrats!"
)

let dismissalPolicy: ActivityUIDismissalPolicy = .default

activity.end(
    ActivityContent(state: finalContent, staleDate: nil),
    dismissalPolicy: dismissalPolicy)
}
```

## Building Live Activity UI

* Show most essential content
* Simple design
* Show additional details in the application

### Dynamic Island presentations.

 * There are three presentations: ***compact, minimal and expanded.***
 * When an app’s Live Activity is the only one running on the system, it’ll be displayed using the compact presentation.
 * The compact presentation has two areas, ***leading and trailing.***
 * They appear together to form a cohesive presentation in the Dynamic Island.
 * Choose essential content to show in the leading and trailing space.
 * Users should be able to identify the specific activity by looking at the content.
 * Create a Dynamic Island view builder to represent each of those presentations. 
 * When more than one app starts a Live Activity, the system chooses which Live Activities are visible and displays both of them using the minimal presentation for each: 
    * one minimal presentation appears attached to the Dynamic Island 
    * the other appears detached.
 * Your minimal view should only have the most critical information, as you have very limited space to work with.
 * When users touch and hold a Live Activity in a compact or minimal presentation, the system displays the content in an expanded presentation.
 * For the expanded presentation, the system divides the expanded presentation into different areas. 
 * The first closure of the DynamicIsland view builder represents the expanded content. 
 * Within that closure, each section content can be defined with the expanded region passing the specific position.

## Related Sessions

- [Bring widgets to life - WWDC23](https://developer.apple.com/wwdc23/10028)
- [Update Live Activities with Push Notifications - WWDC23](https://developer.apple.com/wwdc23/10185)
- [Design Dynamic Live Activities - WWDC23](https://developer.apple.com/wwdc23/10194)
