---
contributors: RamitSharma991
---

## Airplay Overview
- With AirPlay Audio you can stream your favorite music or podcast in perfect sync. 
- With AirPlay Video, you can stream your favorite movies and shows.
- With mirroring, you can share photos, personal videos, games, web pages, or spreadsheets. 

## Airplay Enhanced Audio Buffering
 - Built with a new and improved protocol keeping Whole home audio in mind.
 - Audio streams faster than real-time playback speed in order to minimize playback interruptions. 
 - Highly responsive on HomePod or iPhone as a remote control.
 - Supports multi-channel audio formats, like Dolby ATMOS.
 - Intelligent use of Lossless playback for iOS.
 - Supports HLS Interstitials. 

## Add Support To Your App
 - If playing media is central to your app, set your audio session's category to `.playback`. This will ensure your app's media will continue playing when the app is in background.

```swift 
let audioSession = AVAudioSession.sharedInstance()
try audioSession.setCategory(. playback ,xmode: . default , policy:.longFormAudio ) 
```
- for spoken audio, like podcasts or audiobooks, to set the mode to `.spokenAudio`
- set the audio session's routing policy to `.longFormAudio`. Longform audio is anything other than system sounds, such as music or podcasts. 

## Intelligent Airplay Support 
- Add a new key/value to `info.plist` and set `AVInitialRouteSharingPolicy = LongformAudio`

### Supporting Airplay
- Identify the audio type: add `AVRoutePickerView` to your view hierarchy to include an AirPlay picker in your app. 
- Add an Airplay picker: The picker provides people with a list of potential AirPlay devices that they can use with your app.
- Add a media player: `MPNowPlayingInfoCenter` and `MPRemoteCommandCenter` to receive remote commands, like play, pause, or skip.

## Supporting Airplay Enhanced Audio Buffering

`AVPLayer` or `AVQueuePlayer` is the simplest way to support enhanced audio buffering for your app where AVQueuePlayer is highly recommended.
- Create a queue player `let player = AVQueuePlayer()`
- Identify a URL that points to local or cloud content that you want to play.
- Then create an AVAsset instance with the URL, and create an AVPlayerItem instance with that asset.
- Give the AVPlayerItem to the player and start playback.
- Automatically gets enhanced audio buffering when it is routed to AirPlay.

```swift
let player = AVQueuePlayer()

let url = URL(string: "http://www.examplecontenturl.com")
let asset = AVAsset(url: url)
let item = AVPlayItem(asset: asset)

player.insert(item, after: nil)
player.play()

```
- If your app preprocess on the media data or have a DRM model AVPlayer use`AVSampleBufferAudioRenderer and AVSampleBufferRenderSynchronizer` to synchronize multiple queued sample buffers to a single timeline
- create a serial queue to perform all playback operations on. 
- Create the audio renderer and the render synchronizer. The synchronizer is used to establish the media timeline.

```swift
let serializationQueue = DispatchQueue(label: "sample.buffer.player.serialization.queue")
let audioRenderer = AVSampleBufferAudioRenderer()
let renderSynchronizer = AVSampleBufferRenderSynchronizer()
```
- Add the audio renderer to the render synchronizer `renderSynchronizer.addRenderer(audioRenderer)`. This will tell the audio renderer to follow the media timeline.
- To enqueue audio data, install a callback that will let you know you need more data.

```swift
serializationQueue.async { [weak self] in
    guard let self = self else { return }
    // Start processing audio data and stop when there's no more data.
    self.audioRenderer.requestMediaDataWhenReady(on: serializationQueue) { [weak self] in
        guard let self = self else { return }
        while self.audioRenderer.isReadyForMoreMediaData {
            let sampleBuffer = self.nextSampleBuffer() // Returns nil at end of data.
            if let sampleBuffer = sampleBuffer {
                self.audioRenderer.enqueue(sampleBuffer)
            } else {
                // Tell the renderer to stop requesting audio data.
                audioRenderer.stopRequestingMediaData()
            }
        }
    }

    // Start playback at the natural rate of the media.
    self.renderSynchronizer.rate = 1.0
}
```
- Both APIs will work for non-AirPlay playback, including local or Bluetooth. 
- Developers might want different APIs for AirPlay and non-AirPlay playback. In that case, your app can register to the routeChangeNotification and act accordingly depending on the current route.

## CarPlay enhanced audio Buffering
- car manufacture support.
- Wireless, robust and responsive playback.
- Same APIs support CarPlay.
