---
contributors: skhillon
---

## Prerequisites
This session builds on the following 2 sessions from WWDC 2015:

- [Protocol-Oriented Programming in Swift](../wwdc15/408)
- [Building Better Apps with Value Types in Swift](../wwdc15/414)

## Overview
This session is about using value types and protocols to make our apps better. A key component is **local reasoning**, which means that when we look at some code, we don't have to think about how the rest of our code interacts with that one function/class/etc.

Local reasoning makes our code easier to maintain, easier to write, and easier to test. We're focused on local reasoning in the context of Model-View-Controller (MVC) apps. In MVC:

- The Model stores our data
- The View presents our data
- The Controller coordinates between the model and view

### Lucid Dreams
Our example app is Lucid Dreams, which lets people record their dreams so they can remember them later.

When we open the app, we immediately see a list of dreams that we've had:

![lucid_dreams_home]

Tapping a dream allows us to edit it:

![lucid_dreams_edit]

### Roadmap

1. Recap of value types and protocols in the Model layer (this was mostly covered in the prerequisite sessions)
2. Focus: View and Controller layers
3. Testing

The sample code for Lucid Dreams is available [at this link][sample_code].


## 1. Model
### What is a dream?
We need to represent dream entries in our application.

```swift
// Reference semantics
class Dream {
  var description: String
  var creature: Creature
  var effects: Set<Effect>
  // ...
}
```

Classes use reference semantics, meaning that references to the same object share their storage. This can be a problem if `dream1` isn't expecting its description to be changed:

```swift
var dream1 = Dream(...)
var dream2 = dream1
dream2.description = "Unicorns all over"  // Changed for dream1 AND dream2!
```

![unintended_mutations]

### Unintended mutations hurt local reasoning.
This diagram shows relationships between entities in an early version of Lucid Dreams. Relationships can be explicit, implicit, one-way, two-way, dynamic, or static:

![lucid_dreams_relationships]

What happens if we test the `Dream` type on its own? Even if we create a dream that stands by itself, we won't be testing its real usage because there are many more dependencies that we're not considering. Our tests may pass, but real usage may introduce unintentional mutations.

We can solve this ambiguity by making our `Dream` type a struct, which has value semantics. This means each variable has independent storage--changing the value of one doesn't affect another. This also means that `Dream`s aren't involved in the complicated relationships we saw earlier.

![value_semantics_dream]

Using value semantics improves our ability to reason locally. We should use value semantics beyond just the model layer!

## 2. View layer (cell layout)
An earlier version of Lucid Dreams created cells as abstract subclasses of `UITableViewCell`. For example, `DecoratingLayoutCell` shows a decoration on the left and a larger content area on the right.

Then, the team made a concrete subclass of the layout cell called `DreamCell`, which shows a dream image and description.

![cell_layout_intro]

The team used this architecture because they wanted to be able to use their layout in different places. Unfortunately, this didn't work out; it was easy to use inside table views, but hard to use in any other type of view.

The team wanted to find a better architecture where they could use their layouts together with table view cells and plain `UIView`s. They also wanted to add `SpriteKit` to show particle effects.

*Note: while this example focuses on layout, the strategies discussed can be used in any part of an app.*

### Refactoring our cell

Before:

```swift
class DecoratingLayoutCell: UITableViewCell {
  var content: UIView
  var decoration: UIView
  // Perform layout
}
```

There's no need for layout logic to be trapped inside of a cell; it's just math and geometry to figure out the size of some frames. Let's change this to a struct that asks for a rectangle when performing layout.

```swift
struct DecoratingLayout {
  var content: UIView
  var decoration: UIView

  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) {
    // Perform layout
  }
}
```

With this small change, we now have an isolated piece of code that only knows how to do layout. We can update our `DreamCell` to use this new struct to lay out its children.

```swift
class DreamCell: UITableViewCell {
  // ...
  override func layoutSubviews() {
    var decoratingLayout = DecoratingLayout(content: content, decoration: decoration)
    decoratingLayout.layout(in: bounds)
  }
}
```

We can now use this exact same code in our `UIView` subclass as well because the layout logic is decoupled from table view cells.

```swift
class DreamDetailView: UIView {
  // ...
  override func layoutSubviews() {
    var decoratingLayout = DecoratingLayout(content: content, decoration: decoration)
    decoratingLayout.layout(in: bounds)
  }
}
```

### Testing
Now that our layout can be used in isolation, it's really easy for us to write a unit test. We just create some views, add them to our layout, and then lay them out in a known rect. Then, we just have to verify that the resulting frames are what we expected.

```swift
func testLayout() {
  let child1 = UIView()
  let child2 = UIView()

  var decoratingLayout = DecoratingLayout(content: content, decoration: decoration)
  decoratingLayout.layout(in: CGRect(x: 0, y: 0, width: 120, height: 40))

  XCTAssertEqual(child1.frame, CGRect(x: 0, y: 5, width: 35, height: 30))
  XCTAssertEqual(child2.frame, CGRect(x: 35, y: 5, width: 70, height: 30))
}
```

Our test *doesn't* have to create a table view or wait for the right view layout callbacks to happen. It can just tell our layout to work and then verify the output.

This is a general benefit we have now: our new layout struct is really small and focused, so **it's easy to reason locally about this code.** We only have to understand the struct in isolation.

### Supporting `SpriteKit`

We don't want to have to duplicate our `DecoratingLayout` code into something like this:

```swift
// We DON'T want this.
struct ViewDecoratingLayout {
  var content: UIView
  var decoration: UIView

  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) {
    content.frame = ...
    decoration.frame = ...
  }
}

struct NodeDecoratingLayout {
  var content: SKNode
  var decoration: SKNode

  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) {
    content.frame = ...
    decoration.frame = ...
  }
}
```

`SKNode` is not a subclass of `UIView`, so there's no common superclass that we can use here. How can we combine these together into a single layout?

The only operations we perform with `content` and `decoration` is to set their frames, so that's the only functionality we need to mandate. We can represent that requirement with a protocol and eliminate duplicate code.

```swift
protocol Layout {
  var frame: CGRect { get set }
}

struct DecoratingLayout {
  var content: Layout
  var decoration: Layout

  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) {
    content.frame = ...
    decoration.frame = ...
  }
}
```

Finally, we can use retroactive modeling to make `UIView` and `SKNode` conform to our new protocol.

```swift
extension UIView: Layout {}
extension SKNode: Layout {}
```

This is one of the benefits of relying on protocols instead of superclasses for polymorphism. We can add functionality to unrelated types within a specific context.

Another benefit is that our `DecoratingLayout` no longer needs a dependency on `UIKit` or `SpriteKit`, so we can easily bring the same system to `AppKit` to support layouts on `NSView`s.

### Generic types
When we're using `DecoratingLayout` in a view, we want to be able to add all of its content as subviews. Similarly, when we're using it in a `SpriteKit` scene, we want to be able to add our content as child nodes.

Right now, `content` and `decoration` can be any type that has a frame. This could mean that we could have `content: UIView` and `decoration: SKNode` in the same struct. We need to make our requirements more strict so that we have *only* `UIView` or *only* `SKNode`.

Swift lets us use generics to require that both `content` and `decoration` are the same concrete type:

```swift
struct DecoratingLayout<Child: Layout> {
  var content: Child
  var decoration: Child
  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) { ... }
}
```

Generics are useful because:

- They give us more control over types
- They can be optimized more at compile time because the compiler has more information about what we're doing

To learn more, see [Understanding Swift Performance](416).

### Sharing code
We have a great implementation of `DecoratingLayout`, but our app also includes other types of layouts like a `CascadingLayout`. Both show decoration on the left and content on the right with some minor differences, so we should be able to reuse a lot of code.

#### Inheritance
One possible tool is inheritance, but that carries a lot of responsibility. We would have to consider what our superclass is doing, and what any subclasses may want to change or override. Also, we usually have to inherit from a framework class like `UIView`, and there's a lot more code to consider there.

In short, inheritance doesn't give us **local reasoning**.

#### Composition
A better solution is composition, the idea of combining smaller pieces to build larger pieces. This allows us to understand each independent piece in isolation. We can also enforce encapsulation without worrying about subclasses or superclasses poking holes in our abstractions.

We could write `CascadingLayout` with a `UIView` property that handles cascading and a `DecoratingLayout` that handles our decorating layout behavior. We could then add both of these as subviews in our `UITableViewCell`.

![cascading_composition]

The problem is that class instances are expensive. Each new class instance requires an allocation on the heap. Views are even more expensive because there's a lot of work needed to support a view's drawing and event handling.

Making a view that does no drawing and only acts as a layout abstraction is very wasteful. 

### Composition of value types
The correct approach is to use composition, but with value types instead of views.

- Structs are very lightweight!
- Value semantics give us much better encapsulation, so we can put pieces together without worrying about someone else modifying the copy that we're using.

We can write the cascading part of our layout with an array of children that are laid out:

```swift
struct CascadingLayout<Child: Layout> {
  var children: [Child]
  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) {
    ...
  }
}
```

Then, we can decompose this layout with our `DecoratingLayout` to get the desired effect

```swift
struct DecoratingLayout {
  var content: Layout
  var decoration: Layout

  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) {
    content.frame = ...
    decoration.frame = ...
  }
}
```

![cascading_composition_value]

There's still one more problem: these layouts only expect to have children that are either `UIView`s or `SKNode`s. We should generalize this so we can use layouts and compose them together.

Currently, our `Layout` protocol requires a `frame` property, but we only ever set a frame. We don't actually care if child views have a frame or not. We just want to be able to tell a child view to lay itself out in a given rect.

Let's change our protocol to better reflect our intentions.

```swift
protocol Layout {
  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect)
}
```

`UIView` and `SKNode` can still conform to this protocol. When `layout` is called, they'll just set their frame.

But now, we can make our layouts conform to this protocol as well. They already know how to do layout! When given a frame, they just divide up that rect and pass it to their children. 

```swift
struct DecoratingLayout<Child: Layout>: Layout { ... }
struct CascadingLayout<Child: Layout>: Layout { ... }
```

Now we can build a fancy layout by composing together a `CascadingLayout` and a `DecoratingLayout`.

![composition_result]

Composition helps us build out layouts in a very declarative way. There's even more examples in the [sample code][sample_code].

### Associatedtypes
We want to be able to add the contents of our layout to either a superview or a `SpriteKit` scene. An important part of the functionality is adding contents in the right order. For example, our `CascadingLayout` wants its children to be ordered so that they line up on top of each other.

![cascading_children]

Let's expand our protocol to support that as well. We'll add a property to be able to return its contents, and our combining layouts will use this property to return all contents in the correct order. Leaf views and nodes can just return themselves.

```swift
protocol Layout {
  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect)

  var contents: [Layout] { get }
}
```

If we make the type of the contents just be our protocol, then we would again be allowing mixed environments of `UIView`s and `SKNode`s. Since we're adding these children to a parent, we only want to allow a homogenous collection of just `UIView`s or just `SKNode`s.

To enforce this requirement, we can add an associated type to our protocol. An associated type is like a type placeholder. The conforming type chooses the concrete type that it wants to use.

```swift
protocol Layout {
  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect)

  associatedtype Content
  var contents: [Layout] { get }
}
```

This allows us to write something that just knows how to lay out views and specify that its content type is `UIView`. Similarly, we can write layouts that only have `SKNode`s as their contents.

![associatedtype]

This type safety is great, but again, we don't want to have to write a separate layout for views and nodes. We can fix this by using a generic version of our layout, where our content type can be whatever the content of our child is.

This means we can make a `DecoratingLayout` that works *only* with `UIView`s or *only* with `SKNode`s. Both are strongly typed so that we can pull out their contents and know exactly what they are, and they can still share all of the layout logic.

```swift
struct DecoratingLayout<Child: Layout>: Layout {
  // ...
  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) { ... }

  typealias Content = Child.Content
  var contents: [Content] { get }
}
```

Associated types are a great way to make protocols even more powerful.

### Heterogeneous layouts
Currently, we force our `content` and `decoration` views to be the same type, but this doesn't work if we want a `CascadingLayout` together with a `UIView`.

![heterogeneous_composition]

What we really want is for all our `content`s to have the same type. Let's update our layouts to reflect that.

We can use 2 generic type parameters, one for each child, and we can specify that only the contents have to be the same type:

```swift
struct DecoratingLayout<
  Child: Layout, Decoration: Layout where Child.Content == Decoration.Content
>: Layout {
  var content: Child
  var decoration: Decoration

  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect) { ... }

  typealias Content = Child.Content
  var contents: [Content] { get }
}
```

### Finished protocol
Here's our finished protocol, which represents exactly what it means to be part of the layout process. See the [sample app][sample_code] for more examples of how this was used, such as rendering images on a background thread.

```swift
protocol Layout {
  mutating func layout(in rect: CGRect)

  associatedtype Content
  var contents: [Content] { get }
}
```

#### Unit tests
One more place we can take advantage of this protocol is in our unit tests.

We can write a struct that has a `frame` property and conforms to our `Layout` protocol. Then, we can change our unit test to use this instead of `UIView`s as the children in our layout, which removes the dependency on `UIKit`.

```swift
struct TestLayout: Layout {
  var frame: CGRect
  // ...
}

func testLayout() {
  let child1 = TestLayout()
  let child2 = TestLayout()

  // same assertions as before...
}
```

Our tests now only rely on the logic in our own layout and test structs. **We're unit testing our layout without using the GUI.**




[sample_code]: https://developer.apple.com/go/?id=lucid-dreams

[lucid_dreams_home]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/lucid_dreams_home.png

[lucid_dreams_edit]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/lucid_dreams_edit.png

[unintended_mutations]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/unintended_mutations.png

[lucid_dreams_relationships]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/lucid_dreams_relationships.png

[value_semantics_dream]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/value_semantics_dream.png

[cell_layout_intro]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/cell_layout_intro.png

[cascading_composition]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/cascading_composition.png

[cascading_composition_value]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/cascading_composition_value.png

[composition_result]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/composition_result.png

[cascading_children]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/cascading_children.png

[associatedtype]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/associatedtype.png

[heterogeneous_composition]: ../../../images/notes/wwdc16/419/heterogeneous_composition.png
