---
contributors: zntfdr
---

## Stacks

When working with stacks of many elements embedded in `ScrollView`s, instead of loading everything immediately with `HStack`/`VStack`, we can now use [`LazyHStack`][lazyHstack] and [`LazyVStack`][lazyVstack], which load their children lazily.

Not all stacks should be lazy, for example `overlay`s and `background`s are views that will be drawn only when it's time to be displayed, therefore using lazy stacks don't bring any benefit in these cases.

## Grids

SwiftUI Grids are the equivalent of css's [Flexbox layout][flexbox].

[`LazyVGrid`][lazyVGrid] and [`LazyHGrid`][lazyHGrid], similar to stacks, but for multi-column layouts.

When working with grids, we define our columns/rows layout via an array of [`GridItem`][gi] instances.  
Each item will specify how its relative column width/row height is computed.

`GridItem`s are flexible by default, therefore taking all the space available:

```swift
// Creates a three column layout, with equally distributed space between the three columns.

var columns = [
    GridItem(spacing: 0),
    GridItem(spacing: 0),
    GridItem(spacing: 0)
]

ScrollView {
    LazyVGrid(columns: columns, spacing: 0) {
        ForEach(...) { ... in
           ...
        }
    }
}
```

We can also create an adaptive grid layout by declaring

```swift
// Creates as many columns as possible, each with a minimum width of 300 points.

var columns = [
    GridItem(.adaptive(minimum: 300), spacing: 0)
]

ScrollView {
    LazyVGrid(columns: columns, spacing: 0) {
        ForEach(...) { ... in
           ...
        }
    }
}
```

## Progressive Display Of Information

### Disclosure Groups

[`DisclosureGroup`][dg] is a new SwiftUI element that shows/hides content to the user based on a boolean `@binding`.

```swift
DisclosureGroup(isExpanded: $showingContent) {
   // content here
} label: {
   Text("Show content", ...)
}
```

It can be seen as a more adaptive version of the following code:

```swift
Button { 
   showingContent.toggle() 
} label: {
   Text("Show content")
}

if showingContent {
   // content here
}
```

Passing a binding is optional:  
if we don't provide one, the view will use an internal binding and start with `isExpanded` set to `false`.

### Outlines

An [`OutlineGroup`][og] is similar to a `ForEach` except that, instead of iterating over a flat collection, `OutlineGroup` traverses a tree structure data.

For example, this view can be used to display and explore a folder structure or a binary tree.

```swift
OutlineGroup(
    array,
    children: \.children
) { element in
    ...
}
```

`OutlineGroup` needs to know how to traverse our model, therefore it has a few requirements: 

1. we must pass a collection of `Identifiable` objects
2. these objects need to have a property, passed via `\.children` keypath in the example above, that contain an optional collection of the same type

By default the user:

- will only see the elements of the top _"level"_ of the structure at first
- will be able to tap on those elements that contain "sub-collections" to display them.

Behind the scenes `OutlineGroup` uses `DisclosureGroup` to show/hide the nested elements.

`OutlineGroup` is not eager: it computes its rows on demand, based on what it needs to display.

### Lists

`List` has also gained the same capabilities of `OutlineGroup`.

[lazyVstack]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/lazyvstack 
[lazyHstack]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/lazyhstack 
[lazyHGrid]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/lazyhgrid
[lazyVGrid]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/lazyvgrid
[gi]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/griditem
[og]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/outlinegroup
[dg]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/DisclosureGroup
[flexbox]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CSS_Flexible_Box_Layout