---
contributors: zntfdr
---

Structure your app for SwiftUI previews

## Preview Multiple Files At Once

- Pin previews by tapping the pin symbol in the preview canvas bottom bar. 
- Only one preview can be pinned.
- By pinning a preview we can browse our project, edit files etc, and those previews will still be displayed on the screen.

## App Life Cycle

- It's important to define explicit dependencies for our data.
- Models that are created using `@StateObject` are not initialized in previews.

## Where to define sample data 

In the `General` tab of our project editor we have a `Development Assets` section: 

- it contains paths to files and folders that Xcode include only in the `development` configuration of our app
- we can add both assets and code (for preview sample data for example)

## Structure Views To Be Previeable

For different ideas on how to do so

### 1. Immutable Inputs

- Pass only basic types such as `Int` and `String`
- Pass down to the view only data that the `View` needs.
- For buttons actions and similar, pass a closure.

### 2. Mutable Inputs (`@Binding`)

- Use `.constant()` for fixed `@Binding` previews
- For dynamic previews:
  - create an interemediate `View`, that behaves as the `@State` container
  - the `body` of this container will be the view that we would like to preview, injected with the container `@State`

### 3. Generics Inputs

Instead of passing actual explict types instances to a `View`s: 

- we can make our `View`s generic
- we can pass instances of a protocol that conforms to `ObservableObject`, `Identifiable` and that provides anything that our `View` needs

4. Use Environment

We can pass environment objects directly in the preview

## Xcode Preview Toolbar

- In Xcode 12 above each preview we have a new toolbar.
- This toolbar displays the current state of the preview and the title in the middle and two buttons on both sides:
  1. the leading button is used to either start the live preview or to attach the debugger to the preview.
  2. the next button is used to send the preview to a real connected device
    - previewing on device will also display a `Previews` app on the homescreen, which will open the last preview used in that phone, even when the phone is disconnected from the Xcode

- 
  3. the second trailing button lets set particular environment states and add padding to the preview
  4. the last button creates a duplicate of the preview