Add configuration and intelligence to your widgets

By making the widget configurable, users can create multiple different instances of the same widget, each with different configuration

## Basics
### Widget Extension

- contains SwiftUI code that renders the visual appearance of the widget. 
- contains some metadata about the widget itself.

- When your widget is configurable, you can specify which options to ask the user on the backside of the widget, and the system will display them for you. These questions are called parameters.

 To define which parameters are shown, we use Intents, which is the same system that you can use to add support for Siri and Shortcuts to your app. An Intent contains an ordered list of parameters. Each parameter that you put in the Intent will show up as a row in the widget's configuration UI. You declare your Intents in Xcode using an Intents definition file. This file contains all of your Intents, their parameters, and indicates which parts of the system they support.

By compiling this file into your app, the system will be able to read information about your Intents. Once you define an Intent, Xcode will also generate an Intent class for you, containing a property for each parameter. 

```swift
class ViewRecentPurchasesIntent: INIntent {
  var card: Card?
  var category: Category?
}
```

Kind of supported configurations: 
- `String` the ui will show a text field
- `Bool` toggle
- integers number fields and steppers
- decimals number fields and sliders
- contact pickers
- location pickers
- enumerations will show a list of possible cases (both static and dynamic supported)
- date
- duration
- url
- measurement
- currency amount
= payment method

can support multiple items of the same configuration

## How to add a configuration to your widget

The session shows how to add a configuration to an intent, this is done via the intent editor and it's several steps around enabling an intent for our Widget, it starts at 7:00 and continues to 15:00. It's very visual: it's better to watch the video for this part.

## Configuration experience

We can customize the appearance of the backside of our widget:

- [`.configurationDisplayName(_:)`][confDisplNameDoc] on the widget declaration to customize the title
- [`.description(_:)`][descDoc] on the widget declaration to customize its title
- we can define a `AccentColor` color asset in the Widget assets catalog for the accent color
- we can define a `WidgetBackground` color to set the widget background color

## System Intelligence

- adding configuration to your widget allows the system to better predict times to display your widget in a stack.

[confDisplNameDoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/widgetkit/intentconfiguration/configurationdisplayname(_:)-3ubj0
[descSoc]: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/widgetkit/intentconfiguration/description(_:)-1yars