---
contributors: antonio081014
originalUrl: https://github.com/antonio081014/WWDC_Learning_Review
---

See demo [here](https://github.com/antonio081014/TouchDemo).

**When `UIScrollView` with DrawerView (`UIVisuallEffectView`) added to controller's view(AView), AView's user interaction is blocked. How to keep AView unblocked from user?**

Set `UIScrollView`'s [`userInteractionEnabled`](https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UIKit/Reference/UIView_Class/index.html#//apple_ref/occ/instp/UIView/userInteractionEnabled) to be `NO`.

**When `UIScrollView`'s userInteractionEnabled is false, how can we keep `UIScrollView`'s `panGestureRecognizer`, so the `UIScrollView` could be pulled up or down.**

Easy solution would be pass the UIScrollView's property [`panGestureRecognizer`](https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UIKit/Reference/UIScrollView_Class/#//apple_ref/occ/instp/UIScrollView/panGestureRecognizer) to its superview, so the superview could recognize the pan gesture, while not being blocked.

**How to add subviews to `UIVisualEffectView`?**

Since `UIVisualEffectView` would do tons of work for the blurring effect on the view, it's best to add any subview to its `contentView`, which is a `UIView` on top of it. Then these subviews would not interfere with the computation of visual effect.

**How does `- hitTest:withEvent:` work?**

This function is defined in `UIView`, the following is the pseudo code.

```objc
- (UIView *)hitTest:(CGPoint)point withEvent:(UIEvent *)event { 
	if (/* point is in our bounds */) {
        for (/* each subview, in reverse order */) {
            UIView *hitView = /* recursive call on subview */
            if (hitView != nil) {
                return hitView;
			}
		}
			return self; 
	}
	return nil; 
}
```

**How to reenable user interaction on `UIScrollView` without blocking its parent view?**

1. Set `UIScrollView`'s `userInteractionEnabled` to `YES`.
2. Subclass `UIScrollView`, override `- hitTest:withEvent:` function, so this function either returns `UIScrollView`'s subview, or its superview, rather itself.

```objc
- (UIView *)hitTest:(CGPoint)point withEvent:(UIEvent *)event {
    UIView *hitView = [super hitTest:point withEvent:event];
    if (hitView == self) {
        return nil;
    }
    return hitView;
}
```

**How to not cancel other touch event when `UILongPressGestureRecognizer` is triggered?**

Set `cancelsTouchesInView` of `UILongPressGestureRecognizer` to `NO`.

**How to make several `UIGestureRecognizer` recognize simultaneously?**

Implement `UIGestureRecognizer` delegate method: `- gestureRecognizer:shouldRecognizeSimultaneouslyWithGestureRecognizer:`, and return `YES` when certain both of two `UIGestureRecognizer` could be triggered.
  
This way, `UIGestureRecognizer` could work simultaneously, between siblings and self, also between superview and self.

Thank system for supporting resting touches.

**Good UX to implement:**

1. When grab / drop a dot: Apply a simple animation could be very good choice. Just scale the transform and change the alpha of view.
2. When user does not click on the center of view, there might be a 'Jump' at first: This could be fixed simply move it to the user touch location when view is grabbed.

**Fastest Fix on conflict between `UIView`'s touch event and `UIScrollView`'s `panGestureRecognizer`.**

Just disable, then enable `UIScrollView`'s `panGestureRecognizer` when UIView's `UILongPressGestureRecognizer` triggered.
This will disable `panGestureRecognizer` for current user touch, but reenable it will allow panGestureRecognizer to recognize new touches from user.

**How to apply the feature "Touch Delay Gesture Recognizer" from `UIScrollView` to `UIView`.**

1. Subclass `UIGestureRecognizer`.
2. `#import <UIKit/UIGestureRecognizerSubclass.h>`
3. Introduce a `NSTimer` for the purpose of delay.
4. Set `delaysTouchesBegan` to `YES` in initializer.
5. Set `UIGestureRecognizer`'s State to **Failed** when timer expired, touch cancelled or touch ended.
6. Override `- reset` function to reset timer.
7. Add this customized UIGestureRecognizer to the view, which is a subclass of `UIView`.

**How to more easily recognize user's touch when subclass of UIView is pretty small for user to click on?**

Override method `- pointInside:withEvent:` of `UIView`, in the method, check bigger area instead, rather than the bounds of the view.